Function docs (#3215)
brimdata/zed: docs/language/functions.md

```
cut(f ...<fields>) -> record
```

`cut` accepts one or more [field expressions](./expressions.md) f and returns
a record with only these fields. This is functionally equivalent to the [`cut`
operator](./operators.md#cut)

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:{a:1,b:2,c:3}}' | zq -z 'this := cut(foo.a,foo.c)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:{a:1,c:3}}
```

### `fields`

```
fields(r record) -> [string]
```

`fields` returns a string array of all the field names in record r.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:{a:1,b:2,c:3}}' | zq -z 'cut foo := fields(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:["a","b","c"]}
```

### `pick`

```
pick(f ...<fields>) -> record
```

`pick` accepts one or more [field expressions](./expressions.md) f and returns
a record with only these fields. `pick` is similar to `cut` but only returns 
a value if all field expressions are matched. This is functionally equivalent
to the [`pick` operator](./operators.md#cut)

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:{a:1,b:2,c:3}}' | zq -z 'this := pick(foo.a,foo.c)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:{a:1,c:3}}
```

### `unflatten`

```
unflatten(r record) -> record
```

> `unflatten` returns a copy of r with all successive dotted field names converted
> into nest records. If no argument is supplied to `unflatten`, the root value
> `this` is operated on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`unflatten` returns a copy of `r` with all dotted field names converted
into nested records. If no argument is supplied to `unflatten`, `unflatten`
operates on `this`.
```

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{"a.b.c":"foo"}' | zq -z 'this := unflatten()' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{a:{b:{c:"foo"}}}
```

## Strings

### `join`

```
join(vals [<stringy>], sep <stringy>) -> string
```

> `join` concatenate the elements of string array `vals` to create a single
> string. The string `sep` is placed between each value in the resulting string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`join` concatenates the elements of string array `vals` to create a single
string. The string `sep` is placed between each value in the resulting string.
```

echo '{foo:["a","b","c"]}' | zq -z 'foo := join(foo, ", ")' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:"a, b, c"}
```

### `replace`

```
replace(s <stringy>, old <stringy>, new <stringy>) -> string
```

`replace` replaces all instances of `old` occurring in string `s` with `new`.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:"oink oink oink"}' | zq -z 'foo := replace(foo, "oink", "moo")' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:"moo moo moo"}
```

### `rune_len`

```
rune_len(s <stringy>) -> int64
```

`rune_len` returns the number of runes in `p`. Erroneous and short encodings are
treated as single runes of width 1 byte.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:"Yo! 😎"}' | zq -z 'foo := rune_len(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:5}
```

### `split`

```
split(s <stringy>, sep <stringy>) -> [string]
```

`split` slices `s` into all substrings separated by `sep` and returns an array
of the substrings between those separators.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:"apple;banana;pear;peach"}' | zq -z 'foo := split(foo,";")' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:["apple","banana","pear","peach"]}
```

### `to_lower`

```
to_lower(s <stringy>) -> string
```

> `to_lower` lowercases all unicode letters in `s`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`to_lower` lowercases all Unicode letters in `s`.
```

```

<!-- XXX document time coercion rules  and link below-->

`trunc` returns time `t` (or value that can be coerced to time) rounded down to
the nearest multiple of duration `m`.

```mdtest-command
echo '{ts:2020-05-26T15:27:47Z}' | zq -z 'ts := trunc(ts, 1h)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{ts:2020-05-26T15:00:00Z}
```

### `len`

```
len(v (record,array,set,map,bytes,string,bstring,ip,net,error)) -> int64
```

`len` returns the length of value `v`. Supported types:

- record
- array
- set
- map
- bytes
- string
- bstring
- ip
- net
- error

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:[1,2,3]}' | zq -z 'foo := len(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:3}
```

## Types

### `is`

```
is([s <any>], t type) -> bool
```

`is` returns true if the subject value s is of type t. `is` can accept either
one arguments or two: Value `s` is optional and if omitted the subject value is
the root value (i.e. equivalent to `is(this, type)`).

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:1.}' | zq -z 'foo := is(foo, float64)' -
echo '{foo:1.}' | zq -z 'foo := is({foo:float64})' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:true}
{foo:true}
```

### iserr

```
iserr(v <any>) -> bool
```

> `iserr` returns true if value v is of type error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`iserr` returns true if value `v` is of type error.
```

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:"this is an error"(error)}' | zq -z 'foo := iserr(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:true}
```

### nameof

```
nameof(v <any>) -> string
```

> `nameof` returns the string type name of v if v is an aliased type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`nameof` returns the string type name of `v` if `v` is an aliased type.
```

### `typeof`

```
typeof(a <any>) -> type
```

> `typeof` returns the [type](../formats/zson.md#357-type-type) of value a.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`typeof` returns the [type](../formats/zson.md#357-type-type) of value `a`.
```

  - [`mod`](#mod)
  - [`pow`](#pow)
  - [`round`](#round)
  - [`sqrt`](#sqrt)
- [Parse](#parse)
  - [`parse_uri`](#parse_uri)
  - [`parse_zson`](#parse_zson)
- [Records](#records)
  - [`cut`](#cut)
  - [`fields`](#fields)
  - [`pick`](#pick)
  - [`unflatten`](#unflatten)
- [Strings](#strings)
  - [`join`](#join)
  - [`replace`](#replace)
  - [`rune_len`](#rule_len)
  - [`split`](#split)
  - [`to_lower`](#to_lower)
  - [`to_upper`](#to_upper)
  - [`trim`](#trim)
- [Time](#time)
  - [`trunc`](#trunc)
- [Types](#types)
  - [`is`](#is)
  - [`iserr`](#iserr)
  - [`nameof`](#nameof)
  - [`typeof`](#typeof)
  - [`typeunder`](#typeunder)
- [Value Introspection](#value-introspection)
  - [`has`](#has)
  - [`len`](#len)
  - [`missing`](#missing)

### Pseudo Types

For brevity, psuedo-types which are represented by name wrapped in `<>`, are
used for arguments that accept a range of value types. They are:

| Name | Types |
| --- | --- |
| `<stringy>` | `string`, `bstring`, `err` |
| `<int>` | `int8`, `int16`, `int32`, `int64`<br />`uint8`, `uint16`, `uint32`, `uint64` |
| `<float>` | `float32`, `float64` |
| `<number>` | `<int>`, `<float>` |
| `<timey>` | `time`, `<number>` |

> | `<any>` | Accepts a value as any type as the argument. |

Reviewer: Nit: I think we should sort these.

## Bytes

### `from_base64`

```
from_base64(s string) -> bytes
```

`from_base64` decodes base64 encoded string `s` into a byte sequence.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:"aGVsbG8gd29ybGQ="}' | zq -z 'foo := string(from_base64(foo))' -
```

**Output:**

```mdtest-output
{foo:"hello world"}
```

### `from_hex`

```
from_hex(s string) -> bytes
```

`from_hex` decodes hex encoded string `s` into a byte sequence.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:"68656c6c6f20776f726c64"}' | zq -z 'foo := string(from_hex(foo))' -
```

**Output:** 
```mdtest-output
{foo:"hello world"}
```

### `ksuid`

```
ksuid(bytes) -> string
```

`ksuid` encodes a [ksuid](https://github.com/segmentio/ksuid) byte sequence into
a base62 encoded string.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo  '{id:0x0dfc90519b60f362e84a3fdddd9b9e63e1fb90d1(=ksuid.KSUID)}' \
  | zq -z 'id := ksuid(id)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{id:"1zjJzTWWCJNVrGwqB8kZwhTM2fR"}
```

### `to_base64`

```

> to_base64(b bytes) -> string

Author: Agreed.

> to_base64(b bytes) -> string

Author: https://github.com/brimdata/zed/issues/3255

> to_base64(b bytes) -> string

Author: Should this also work with ip addresses?

```

`to_base64` encodes byte sequence `b` into a base 64 encoded string.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:"hello word"}' | zq -z 'foo := to_base64(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:"aGVsbG8gd29yZA=="}
```

### `to_hex`

```
to_hex(b bytes) -> string
```

> `to_hex` encodes byte sequence `b` into a hexadecimal encoded string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`to_hex` encodes byte sequence `b` into a hexadecimal string.
```

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:0x68656c6c6f20776f726c64}' | zq -z 'foo := to_hex(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:"68656c6c6f20776f726c64"}
```

## IPs

### `network_of`

```
network_of(s ip, [m (net,int,uint)) -> net
```

> `network_of` returns the net of ip address `s` with ip mask `m` applied. `m`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With two arguments, `network_of` returns the net of ip address `s` under mask `m`. `m`
```

> can be a net cidr mask or a signed or unsigned integer. If there is no
> optional `m` argument the default mask of `s` is return.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be a net cidr mask or a signed or unsigned integer. With one argument,
`network_of` returns the default net for `s`.
```

```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:1.}
```

### `log`

```
log(n <number>) -> float64
```

`log` returns the natural logarithm of number `n`.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:4}' | zq -z 'foo := log(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:1.3862943611198906}
```

### `mod`

```
mod(x <int>, y <int>) -> <int>
```

`mod` returns the remainder of `x` divided by `y`.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:5}' | zq -z 'foo := mod(foo, 2)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:1}
```

### `pow`

```
pow(x <number>, y <number>) -> float64
```

`pow` returns the base-`x` exponential of `y`.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:2}' | zq -z 'foo := pow(foo, 5)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:32.}
```

### `round`

```
round(n <number>) -> <number>
```

`round` returns the number `n` rounded to the nearest integer value.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:3.14}' | zq -z 'foo := round(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:3.}
```

## Parse

### `parse_uri`

```
parse_uri(u <stringy>) -> record
```

`parse_uri` parses the [Universal Resource Identifier](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier)

> string `u` into a generic URI record. The returned record has the following
> key/values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
string `u` into a generic URI record. The returned record has the following
type:
```

{foo:true}
{foo:true}
```

### iserr

```
iserr(v <any>) -> bool
```

`iserr` returns true if value v is of type error.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:"this is an error"(error)}' | zq -z 'foo := iserr(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:true}
```

### nameof

```
nameof(v <any>) -> string
```

`nameof` returns the string type name of v if v is an aliased type.

### `typeof`

```
typeof(a <any>) -> type
```

`typeof` returns the [type](../formats/zson.md#357-type-type) of value a.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo  '{foo:127.0.0.1}' \
  | zq -z 'foo := typeof(foo)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{foo:(ip)}
```

### `typeunder`

```
typeunder(a <any>) -> type
```

`typeunder` returns the [type](../formats/zson.md#357-type-type) of value `a`.
`typeunder` is similar to `typeof` except that if `a` is [named type](../formats/zson.md#357-type-type)
the type under `a` is returned.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo  '{flavor:"chocolate"}(=flavor)' \
  | zq -z 'cut typeunder := typeunder(this)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{typeunder:({flavor:string})}
```

## Value Introspection

### `missing`

```
missing(e <expression>) -> bool
```

> `missing` returns true if a value in [expression](./expressions.md) e is

Reviewer: Nit: We generally don't include a `./` prefix in relative links. (This applies through the file.)
```suggestion
`missing` returns true if a value in [expression](expressions.md) `e` is
```

> missing. Typically expression e will be some type of selector expression 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
missing. Typically `e` is a selector expression 
```

> (e.g. `foo.bar` or `foo[0]`, `foo`) but `missing` will also return true if a
> variable in an generic expression cannot be found (e.g. `foo+1`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(e.g., `foo.bar` or `foo[0]`, `foo`) but `missing` will also return true if a
variable in a generic expression cannot be found (e.g., `foo+1`).
```

#### Example:

```mdtest-command
echo '{foo:[1,2,3]}' | zq -z 'cut yes := missing(foo[3]), no := missing(foo[0])' -
echo '{foo:{bar:"value"}}' | zq -z 'cut yes := missing(foo.baz), no := missing(foo.bar)' -
echo '{foo:10}' | zq -z 'cut yes := missing(bar), no := missing(foo)' -
echo '{foo:10}' | zq -z 'cut yes := missing(bar+1), no := missing(foo+1)' -
```

**Output:**
```mdtest-output
{yes:true,no:false}
{yes:true,no:false}
{yes:true,no:false}
{yes:true,no:false}
```

### `has`

```

> has(e <expression>) -> bool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
has(e ...<expression>) -> bool
```

```

> `has` returns true if the value(s) in [expression](./expressions.md) e
> exist. `has` is functionally equivalent to [`!missing(foo)`](#missing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`has` returns true if a value exists for every [expression](./expressions.md) in the list `e`.
`has` is functionally equivalent to [`!missing(foo)`](#missing).
```
```suggestion
`has` returns true if the value(s) in [expression](./expressions.md) e
exist. `has(e)` is functionally equivalent to [`!missing(e)`](#missing).
```
